By-Laws of the Undergraduate Senate














































































TABLE OF CONTENTS
By-Laws of the Undergraduate Senate        1
Article I: General        6
Section 1. Philosophy of the Undergraduate Senate        6
Section 2: Definitions        6
Section 3: US Policies        6
A. General        6
B. Jurisdiction        6
C. By-Laws        6
D. Modification        6
Section 4: Rules of Order        6
A. Presiding Officer        6
B. Decision-Making Methods        7
C. Definition of Votes        7
Section 5: Consideration of US Resolutions        7
A. Definition        8
B. Text of Resolutions        8
C. Prior Notification        8
Article II: US Organization        9
Section 1: Composition        9
A. US Districts        9
B. US Elections        9
C. Term of Office        9
D. Meeting Attendance Regulations        10
E. Salaries        11
Section 2: Officers        12
A. President of the US        12
B. Chair        12
C. Deputy Chair        12
D. Parliamentarian        12
E. Treasurer        13
F. Secretary        13
G. Other        13
Section 3: US Meetings        13
A. Fair Criteria of Meetings        13
B. Frequency        14
Section 4: US Committees        14
A. Membership        14
B. Meetings        14
C. Powers and Composition of US Committees        15
D. US Committees        15
E. Special US Committees        18
Section 5: Senate Projects        18
A. Individual Projects        18
Section 6: Senate Associates        18
A. Membership        18
B. Meetings        18
C. Powers of the Administrator of the LDP        19
Article III: Funding        21
Section 1: General        21
A. The Usual Method for Approving Allocations        21
B. Transfer of Funds        21
C. Schedule        21
D. Funding Role and Membership of the Appropriations Committee        21
E. Budget        22
Section 2: Undergraduate Student General Fee        22
A. General        22
B. Partitioning of USGF        22
C. ASSU Publications        22
Article IV: Elections        30
Section 1. General        30
Section 2. Certification of Election Results        30
A. Definition of Certification        30
B. Refusal of Certification        30
Section 3: Resolution of Ties        31
A. Definition        31
B. Procedure        31
Article V: Proposed Judicial Changes        32
Section 1: Review of Draft and Proposed Judicial Changes        32
A.        32
B.        32
C.        32
Section 2: Consideration of Draft and Proposed Judicial Changes        32
A.        33
B.        33
C.        33
D.        33
E.        33
Appendix I: Election Policies        34
Section 1: General        34
Section 2: Candidates        34
A. Members of the US        34
B. Class Presidents        34
Section 3: US Oath of Office        35
Appendix II: Funding Policies        36
Section 1: Funding Coordinator        36
A. Selection and Term        36
B. Duties        36
Section 2: Application Procedure        36
A. Programming and Community Service Fund        36
B. Requests        37
C. Guide        38
D. Applications        38
Section 3: Review Procedure        38
A. Recommendations        38
Section 4: Terms and Conditions for Use of Funds        38
A. Notification        38
B. Extensions        39
C. Reclamation        39
D. Dissolution        39
E. Co-Sponsorship        39
F. Maximum Limit of Appropriations        39
Section 5: Verification        39
Section 6: Collection Schedule        39
Section 7: Undergraduate General Fee Reserve Expenditures        39
A. Expenditures out of the General Fee Reserve Accounts        40
B. Limits on General Fee Reserve Account Spending        40
Section 8: Undergraduate General Fee Reserve Expenditures        41
A. Budget Modifications        41
Appendix III: Online Meetings Policies        42
Section 1: Spirit of an Online Meeting        42
Section 2: Protocol for Online Meetings        42
Appendix IV: Statements of Purpose of the Undergraduate General Fees        43
Section 1: General        43
Section 2: Statements of Purpose        43
A. Programming and Community Service General Fee        43
B. Publications General Fee        43


The revision history for the By-Laws of the Undergraduate Senate can be found at this link.


________________


Article I: General
Section 1. Philosophy of the Undergraduate Senate
The Undergraduate Senate shall serve the interests and advocate on behalf of the undergraduate population.
Section 2: Definitions
A. The US shall refer to the Undergraduate Senate
B. The undergraduate population shall be all members of the Association in undergraduate programs.
Section 3: US Policies
A. General
The US Policies shall contain the details of the organizational structure of the US. They shall contain information sufficiently important to require some form of US approval to change, but sufficiently malleable that the rigidity of the US By-Laws modification procedure would be inappropriate.
B. Jurisdiction
The US Policies shall govern in all cases where they are applicable, and in which they are not inconsistent with the Constitution, the Association By-Laws, these By-Laws, or the Association Policies.
C. By-Laws
The US Policies shall be included as an Appendix to these By-Laws.
D. Modification
The US Policies may be modified by a majority vote of the US.
Section 4: Rules of Order
A. Presiding Officer
The Chair (or her/his designee) shall be responsible for ensuring that the meetings are run in a fair and efficient manner. The members of the US may overrule any particular decision of the Chair (or her/his designee) in this regard by majority vote.
B. Decision-Making Methods
1. Unless otherwise specified in the Constitution, the Association By-Laws, or these By-Laws, each decision of the US shall be made by a majority vote of the members of the US.
2. At the discretion of the Chair, the vote need not be recorded. However, the decisions of the US must be set down in the minutes.
3. Any member of the US can request a recorded vote for any decision.
4. Quorum
   1. The presence of 1/2 of members of the US at a meeting shall constitute quorum to conduct business.
   2. 1/2 of all members (eight) voting shall constitute quorum for votes.
1. Procedures always requiring a recorded vote of a simple majority of the US shall include:
   1. Appropriations (Special and General Fee) Procedures.
   2. Modification of the Rules of Order.
   3. Election of Officers.
1. Procedures always requiring a recorded vote of 2/3 of the US shall include:
   1. Amending of By-Laws.
   2. Removal of Officers.
   3. Expulsion of members of the US.
   4. Enacting of Resolutions.
   5. Enacting Bills of Reassignment.
   6. Enacting Bills of Censure.
1. Procedures subject to the discretion of the Chair in terms of voting shall include:
   1. Ending discussion.
   2. Adjourning of General or Committee meetings of the US.
1. Procedures always requiring unanimous consent of the US shall include:
   1. Enacting of Congratulatory Resolutions.
C. Definition of Votes
1. Unless otherwise indicated, all votes by the US, or a standing committee thereof, shall be by a majority of those members present and voting.
2. Unless otherwise indicated, in those cases where a 2/3 vote is indicated for the US, or a standing committee thereof, this shall mean 2/3 of those members present and voting.
Section 5: Consideration of US Resolutions
A. Definition
A bill in support or opposition of a position shall be a resolution. Its purpose is to voice the US’s support of a particular cause. This section of these By-Laws governs the consideration of these resolutions, which may or may not be controversial in nature.
B. Text of Resolutions
All resolutions must include the following information in the resolution’s text about the subject of the endorsement:
1. Constitutionality: the resolution must explain how it complies with Article I, Section 5 of the Association Constitution. Specifically, it must show that the issue has a direct effect on at least one Stanford student who is affected by the matter in a substantially different manner than would be the case if they were not a university student, as defined in the Constitution. To meet this requirement, it will suffice to only direct the statement to other elements of the University.
2. Relevance: Resolutions should also demonstrate why the issue is being presented at the present time – whether it is part of a campaign by a student group, if the administration is close to making an important decision, if an event is requesting endorsement from the Association, etc.
3. Background: The resolution’s authors shall include background information about the issue at hand, such as how the issue has arisen, the history of the issue at Stanford (including actions of the administration, student groups, and the Association), and/or facts or statistics surrounding the issue. If background information is too long to be included within the resolution, it can be submitted as a separate document so long as it is present for voting and prior notification.
4. Argument: The resolution’s authors must argue on behalf of the resolution within the text by stating the advantages of the position under consideration and address potential criticisms of the resolution.
5. Authorization: The resolution must authorize action to make use of Association resources on behalf of the endorsed cause. The resolution must specifically explain who is authorized to act, how, and under what circumstances. If a resolution is intended to authorize an indefinite amount of activity in the future, the resolution must say so along with whatever limitations on the activity, the circumstances of its undertaking, or the identity of its undertakers.
C. Prior Notification
1. The full text of resolutions must be presented to the US at least one week in advance of the vote on the bill. This includes the background material, as required by Article I, Section 5, Subsection B.1) if it is not explicitly included in the resolution.
2. Congratulatory Resolutions, defined as resolutions that honor the achievements of individuals or groups that the US believes has impacted or will impact the interests of the members of the Association, shall be exempted from the prior notification requirements. Congratulatory Resolutions must be uncontroversial in nature and pass by unanimous consent.
Article II: US Organization
Section 1: Composition
A. US Districts
1. Members of the US shall be elected from two districts of the undergraduate student population: the Upperclass District and the At- Large District, in accordance with Article II Section 3.A.3 of the ASSU Constitution.
2. Seats in the At-Large District are filled from the at-large undergraduate student population. The 12 candidates with the highest vote totals shall be the new members of the At-Large District of the US.
3. Seats in the Upperclass District are to be filled in accordance with the following policies:
   1. The three upperclass candidates, as defined in Article II Section 3.A.3 of the ASSU Constitution, receiving the most votes shall be the new members of the Upperclass District of the US, provided that they also meet the requirements designated in Appendix I, Section 2.A and receive at least two-thirds as many votes as the at- large candidate with the thirteenth most votes.
   2. If candidates seeking a seat in the Upperclass District do not receive two-thirds as many votes as the at-large candidate with the thirteenth most votes, they will only be elected to the US if they finish within the top fifteen candidates overall.
B. US Elections
1. All members of the US shall be elected either in the spring quarter general election or in a special election.
2. This election cycle must be complete before May 15 of each year.
3. The Elections Policies shall lay out the procedures and timelines for US elections.
C. Term of Office
1. After the US election results are certified by the US, the US and the US Elect shall meet jointly at the next meeting of the US, which shall be the last meeting of the US. The US Elect shall not have voting privileges at this meeting.
2. At the conclusion of the joint meeting, the Chair of the US shall call for a motion to permanently adjourn this session of the US. The passing of such a motion marks the end of the term of office of the members of the US.
3. The new Vice President of the Association shall administer the oath of office to the new members of the US. The swearing in may occur at any time from the moment of the conclusion of the joint meeting to the moment before the convening of the first meeting of the new US. The swearing in of the new members of the US shall mark the start of the term of office of the new members of the US.
4. At the first meeting of the US, the Vice President of the Association shall call the meeting to order, and then the elected members of the US shall select a Chair. The Vice President shall then, at his discretion, pass control of the US floor to the newly elected US Chair.
D. Meeting Attendance Regulations
1. In the event that any member of the US misses three meetings in a quarter, a bill for expulsion must be presented to the US at the meeting(s) following the third absence. For each absence thereafter, a bill for expulsion may be presented at the discretion of the US Chair.
   1. Absences shall not be counted as missed meetings in the case that they are excused.
   2. In order for an absence to be excused, the member must report the absence (or planned absence) to the Chair of the ASSU Undergraduate Senate.
   3. Valid grounds for an excused absence include, but are not limited to, medical circumstances, death in the family, military training leave, voting, jury duty, and religious exemptions.
   4. Guidelines for such circumstances shall be in accord with Stanford University's Staff Personal Policies and student policies.
1. In the event that any member of the US misses more than 50% of the duration of a scheduled US meeting, this non-attendance shall be counted as one absence. The Deputy Chair of the US will determine the non-attendance at the completion of each US meeting.
2. In the event that any member of the US misses three scheduled meetings of a Standing Committee in a quarter of which s/he is a member, the Chair of the Committee shall inform the Standing Committee at the meeting of the third absence, at which point the majority of the Standing Committee present and voting may opt to:
   1. Present a bill of expulsion to the US at the US meeting following the third absence from a Standing Committee meeting.
   2. Present a bill of reassignment to the US at the US meeting following the third absence from a Standing Committee meeting.
   3. Present a bill of censure to the US at the US meeting following the third absence from a Standing Committee meeting.
   4. Take no action against the delinquent member of the Committee.
1. Senators shall remain on campus for the duration of their term with the exception of official university breaks, brief trips, leaves of absences, and study abroad programs, provided all of the following conditions are met:
   1. All Senators must be on campus for the first quarter of their term (the Spring Quarter in which they were elected).
   2. No Senator may be off-campus for more than one quarter of their term.
   3. A Senator wishing to participate in a Study Abroad program must notify the Chair of his or her intention to do so.
   4. No more than three (3) Senators may be abroad during any one quarter.
   5. No later than Week Six (6) of the quarter prior, the Senate Chair must introduce a bill including their selections for the available off-campus slots for the following quarter.
   6. The Chair shall grant priority for available off-campus slots by seniority (according to status with the University Registrar) and to those Senators who have not previously participated in a Stanford Study Abroad Program.
   7. The Undergraduate Senate may overrule the selections or non-selections of the Chair with a majority vote.
   8. Officers and committee chairs relinquish their position upon accepting the Chair's nomination to go off campus, and must be replaced by another Senator.
   9. While a Senator is abroad, they must meet the Meeting Attendance Regulations (Article II, Section 1, Subsection D) by appointing a proxy to represent them during the quarter they are off-campus.
   10. A Proxy Senator shall be nominated by the Senator going abroad in their application to the Chair, then confirmed by a majority vote of the Senate.
   11. Proxy Senators may not serve in officer positions, or as the chair of US committees.
   12. Upon confirmation, a Proxy Senator shall become an ex-officio member of the US.
1. Determinations of Senators' on-campus status pursuant to clauses (4) and (5) shall be made at the discretion of the Senate.
2. Other grounds for removal shall remain at the discretion of the US and a bill for expulsion may be presented.
3. A bill of reassignment shall be defined as a bill that intends to alter the membership of a Standing Committee by a 2/3 vote, as stated in Article II, Section 3, Subsection J.2.c of the Constitution.
E. Salaries
1. The use of salaries to pay officers of the US shall require a 2/3 vote that shall be independent of a confirmation vote (except for those salaries explicitly outlined in these By-Laws).
2. Salaries shall be paid out on a quarterly basis (with one third of the salary paid each quarter)
3. A salary shall not be paid out if an officer does not attend at least 90% of required meetings (as defined by these By-Laws) in a timely fashion. Excused absences shall not count toward the requirement. Members of the US shall individually determine what constitutes timely and excused.
4. At the beginning of winter quarter, the US must vote to reauthorize the payment of the full extent of the salaries included in the operating budget. Such a reauthorization shall require majority approval.
Section 2: Officers
A. President of the US
The Vice President of the Association shall serve as the President of the US.
B. Chair
1. Shall call, set agendas for, and preside over all regular meetings of the US, unless s/he has designated another elected member of the US to perform these tasks.
2. Chair has secondary signing authority.
3. Shall serve as a representative of the US on the Executive Committee.
4. Shall serve on the Appropriations Committee.
5. Must be an elected member of the US.
6. Shall be chosen by a majority vote.
7. May be removed by a 2/3 vote, provided that previous notice has been given.
8. Shall maintain and make available current copies of the By-Laws and Policies of the US.
9. Shall have those other duties specified in the Constitution, the Association By-Laws, and these By-Laws.
C. Deputy Chair
1. Shall have secondary signing authority for the US accounts.
2. Shall serve as a representative of the US on the Executive Committee.
3. Must be an elected member of the US.
4. Shall be chosen by a majority vote.
5. May be removed by a 2/3 vote, provided that previous notice has been given.
6. Shall have those other duties specified in the Constitution, the Association By-Laws, and these US By-Laws.
D. Parliamentarian
1. Shall be responsible for ensuring that the US follows the US By-Laws in meetings and other activities of the US.
2. Shall be responsible for ensuring that the US follows the Rules of Order of the Undergraduate Senate.
3. Must be an elected member of the US.
4. Shall be chosen by a majority vote.
5. May be removed by a 2/3 vote, provided that previous notice has been given.
6. Shall have those other duties specified in the Constitution, the Association By-Laws, and these US By-Laws.
E. Treasurer
1. Shall have primary signing authority for the US accounts. Shall be ultimately responsible for the US accounts.
2. Shall be ultimately responsible for drafting the US budget and keeping track of US finances.
3. Must be an elected member of the US.
4. Shall be chosen by a majority vote.
5. May be removed by a 2/3 vote, provided that previous notice has been given.
6. Shall have the power to call ad hoc meetings with a financial representative of each committee.
7. Shall approve check requests
8. Shall monitor US spending and .provide financial advice to the US.
9. Shall have those other duties specified in the Constitution, the Association By-Laws, and these US By-Laws.
F. Secretary
1. Shall be responsible for keeping accurate minutes of all US meetings, and making them publicly available.
2. Shall include all recorded votes in the US meeting minutes and detail all the ayes, nays, abstentions, and absences.
3. Shall not be an elected officer of the association.
4. Shall be nominated by the outgoing Secretary and confirmed by a majority vote of the incoming US.
5. May be removed by a majority vote of the US.
6. Shall have those other duties specified by the US.
7. May be paid a salary, as specified in the operating budget.
G. Other
The US shall have the power to appoint other officers, with whatever requirements and duties are appropriate. Such other officers may be paid a salary, as specified in either the operating or programming budgets of the US.
Section 3: US Meetings
A. Fair Criteria of Meetings
1. The meeting must be held on a space, whether virtual or actual, accessible by all participants, including members of the general public as required.
2. The meeting participants must be able to communicate and hold discussion in realtime, both with other participants and the moderator.
3. All documents presented at the meeting must be made available to all participants at the meeting, in real-time.
4. For meetings held in a virtual space, mechanisms must exist for all functions that are conducted in real spaces. These mechanisms include, but are not limited to, means to establish roll call, motions, voting tabulation, and meeting records.
5. All motions to table a bill must be honored for all virtual meetings
B. Frequency
The US shall meet at least once each week during the academic year, excluding dead week and finals week.
Section 4: US Committees
A. Membership
1. Any member of the US may attend any meeting of any US Committee. The President and Vice President of the Association shall be ex-officio members of each US Committee.
2. Every US Committee shall have the power to admit additional ex-officio members to its ranks, but not to the US proper. Such additional members shall not have a vote in the US Committees.
B. Meetings
1. Because US Committees are responsible for propelling the business of the US, Committee Chairs shall announce committee meetings to each member of the US. The frequency by which US Committees are obligated to meet are at the discretion of the Chair of that US Committee. However, US Committees are obligated to meet at least five times per quarter.
2. Upon the request of two members of the US, the Chair of a US Committee shall call a special meeting.
3. Complete records of all actions taken by a US Committee during committee meetings shall be made available to the US.
4. Special joint meetings of two or more US Committees may be called by the Chairs of the concerned committees, or upon the request of two members of the US.
5. Quorum
   1. The presence of 1/2 of all voting members of a particular US Committee at their US Committee meeting shall constitute quorum to conduct business.
   2. 1/2 of all voting members of the particular US Committee shall constitute quorum for recommendations to the UG Senate.
C. Powers and Composition of US Committees
1. Except as otherwise noted in the Constitution, these By-Laws, or Acts of the US, all substantive actions of a US Committees shall take the form of recommendations to the US.
2. Each US Committee may choose a Chair from among the members of the US on the Committee.
3. If a committee chooses to do so, depending on the responsibilities that cannot be fulfilled by one chair, it may choose to appoint a deputy chair.
   1. The Deputy chair must be chosen from among members of the committee excluding the committee chair.
   2. The Deputy chair of the committee may not serve as Deputy Chair or Chair of another committee.
D. US Committees
1. Academic Affairs
   1. Shall review all matters pertaining to undergraduate education and requirements.
   2. Shall review matters pertaining to undergraduate research policies and activities.
   3. Shall review matters pertaining to the business and composition of the Academic Council.
   4. Shall participate in and facilitate discussion between student representatives of the various University committees pertaining to undergraduate education.
   5. Shall review academic support services pertaining to undergraduate education including, but not limited to, the Center for Teaching and Learning, the Undergraduate Advising Program, and the Overseas Studies Program.
   6. Shall select the US Liaison to the Faculty Senate in a fair manner from among the interested members of the US.
1. Administration and Rules
   1. Shall review all proposed changes to the Constitution, these By-Laws, the Rules of Order, or the Standing Rules.
   2. Shall review the performance of all officers and bodies of the Association with respect to these rules.
   3. Shall review all matters relating to elections and advise the Elections Commission regarding the same.
   4. Shall interview each nominee to the Constitutional Council and report to the US concerning their qualifications for appointment.
   5. Shall have primary responsibility for reviewing proposals for new service projects, service affiliates, or other agencies of the Association, except for new business projects or business affiliates.
   6. Shall select the US Liaison to the Speakers Bureau in a fair manner from among the interested members of the US.
   7. Shall select the US Liaison to the Legal Counseling Office Policy Board in a fair manner from among the interested members of the US.
   8. Shall review any matters that do not fall under the jurisdiction of any other Standing Committee.
   9. Shall review all proposed pieces of legislation that are unrelated to ASSU funding.
1. Appropriations
   1. Shall formulate fiscal guidelines for all funds established under the Undergraduate Student General Fee, hereafter referred to as the USGF.
   2. Shall formulate Funding Policies, and review proposed changes to existing Policies.
   3. Shall review all requests for Special Fees by undergraduate student organizations.
   4. Shall review any proposed budget changes by undergraduate student organizations receiving Special Fees.
   5. The Financial Manager, the Programming Director, and the Publications Director shall be ex-officio members of this US Committee.
   6. Shall present a statement of purpose for special fees (to be levied on the undergraduate population) to the US before any special fee budget is discussed. The US shall approve this statement of purpose.
   7. The Appropriations Committee shall reserve the right to unilaterally formulate and revise Funding Policies, within the constraints of the Constitution of the Associated Students of Stanford University and in consultation with the ASSU Financial Manager, whenever the Committee deems such actions appropriate. These Funding Policies may also be called Funding Guidelines, and can be amended by a majority of the Appropriations Committee or by a ⅔ vote of the Undergraduate Senate at any time during the Standards Grant Process or no later than one calendar week before the beginning of the Annual Grants Process. There must be good faith effort to provide public notice of funding guidelines.
   8. The Appropriations Committee shall reserve the right to host Funding Office Hours wherein members of the Committee may review funding applications, throughout their term serving on the Committee, for the purpose of ensuring conformity of such applications with the Funding Policies promulgated by the Committee. Once an application is reviewed during a committee member’s Funding Office Hour, it may be presented by the committee member in question for further review by the assembled Appropriations Committee. It shall be during such Funding Office Hours, as well as if needed during a weekly meeting of the full Undergraduate Senate, that members of the Committee undertake a good faith effort to administer a Green Events Checklist, to be provided by the Stanford Office of Sustainability, to all financial officers presenting funding applications, within reason, as a precondition for such funding applications to receive review by the members of the Committee. Furthermore, the Committee shall endeavor to ensure compliance with the Green Events Checklist by the organization applying for funding from the Undergraduate Senate in any manner reasonably within the capacity of the Committee. To this same end, the Committee must undertake good faith efforts to provide public notice of the contents of the Green Events Checklist and any/all regulations pertaining to its usage by the Committee during their Funding Office Hours.
1. Campus Advocacy Committee
   1. Shall review all matters pertaining to undergraduate student organizations.
   2. Shall review all matters pertaining to the policies and administration of undergraduate student services provided by the University or students.
   3. Shall respond to and address current undergraduate issues.
   4. Shall serve as a liaison between students and the administration regarding student organizations.
   5. Shall raise issues of accountability to the administration.
1. Communications
   1. Shall facilitate communication and the exchange of information between the US and general student body.
   2. Shall publicize and promote US initiatives, programming, campaigns, and other events.
   3. Shall organize outreach efforts to educate students on pertinent issues.
   4. Shall publish the voting record of every member of the US.
   5. Shall provide a one paragraph summary of each meeting for social media channels.
   6. Shall create and operate a web page under the ASSU website where all registered students of Stanford University, and only such persons, can request access to recordings of open Senate meetings which will be approved by the Communications Committee
   7. The Chair shall be responsible for keeping an audio recording of the Senate meetings, and sending it to Communications Committee Chair to be uploaded on online database. They shall also record and upload the weekly update reports of individual senators and committee chairs on ASSU US communication channels.
1. Student Life
   1. Shall oversee and review US special committees that pursue issues-based goals that align with the following:
      1. All matters pertaining to undergraduate University residences and issues dealing with residential education
      2. All matters that concern ASSU programming
      3. All matters related to Stanford mental health services and environmental  sustainability
   1. Shall serve as contacts for the student body for any issues pertaining to student life on campus.
E. Special US Committees
The US, and the US Chair, shall have the power to create special US Committees for specific purposes, to vest in them all appropriate powers, to determine their composition, and to designate the Chair of each Special Committee. All substantive actions of a special US Committee shall take the form of recommendations to the US, except as otherwise provided herein.
Section 5: Senate Projects
A. Individual Projects
1. Senators shall be responsible for working on an individual project on behalf of the undergraduate community.
2. This is not meant to preclude senators from working on projects together.
3. Senators shall be responsible for providing an update to the US on their progress towards completing their project every other Senate meeting.
4. The caretaker of the ASSU website shall be responsible for listing the projects of the individual senators on the ASSU website.
5. Failure to comply or dedicate meaningful effort to a project, as determined by the US, may result in a censure.
Section 6: Senate Associates
A. Membership
1. A Senate Associate is a non-elected, ex-officio member of the Undergraduate Senate.
2. Membership is determined by participation in the Leadership Development Program, which is run by the Deputy Chair of the Senate, or by a person the Chair of the Senate appoints, henceforth referred to as “Administrator of the LDP”
B. Meetings
1. Associates shall work with Senators either in committee or on an individual basis at the discretion of the Administrator of the LDP. Associates shall assist Senators on projects or research.
2. Meetings for the Senate Associates shall include weekly Leadership Development Program meetings, shall shall be run by the Administrator of the LDP. This will include a check-in on current projects and assignments given to Associates by Senators. This may also include guest speakers from within the University, at the discretion/interest of the Administrator of the LDP and the Associates.
3. Attendance at general Senate meetings is not required, but may be required on a case-by-case basis, at the discretion of the Administrator of the LDP.
C. Powers of the Administrator of the LDP
1. The Administrator of the LDP may admit as many associates into the LDP as they see fit.
   1. They may assign associates to either committees and/or individual Senators at their discretion.
   2. They must take into account of other Senators' requests.
   3. Associates may serve on multiple committees.
1. After a set number of unexcused absences, the Administrator of the LDP may remove Associates from the Leadership Development Program. This must be approved by a majority vote of the Senate, and the Administrator of the LDP must present a bill detailing the reasons for the Associate's removal.
2. The administrator of the LDP may be removed or reassigned by a 2/3 vote of the Undergraduate Senate.
________________
Article III: Funding
Section 1: General
A. The Usual Method for Approving Allocations
1. Unless otherwise specified in the Constitution, the Association By-Laws, or these By-Laws, all allocations of funds shall be made by majority vote of the members of the US.
2. Decisions involving funds must be made publicly available within one week of the US meeting at which they were made.
3. Unless otherwise specified in the Constitution, the Association By-Laws, or these By-Laws, the members of the US may, by a majority vote, override any allocation of funds. This may only take place at the first US meeting after the minutes of the meeting at which the initial allocation occurred are made publicly available.
B. Transfer of Funds
Transfers of funds from a group's reserve account to its operating account shall be done by the Usual Method for Approving Allocations.
C. Schedule
1. The Undergraduate Student General Fee may be disbursed on the first day of the school year in the case of early discretionary funding or within five days of approval of the request by the US for rolling allocations. All Special Fees shall be available on the first day of the school year.
2. A portion of the USGF shall be allocated during Spring Quarter for the first few weeks of the following academic year. The remainder shall be reserved for quarterly allocations.
3. Quarterly allocations shall be made on a rolling basis. Funds may be made available for the remainder of the current quarter, for subsequent quarters, or for the remainder of the fiscal year.
D. Funding Role and Membership of the Appropriations Committee
1. The Appropriations Committee shall review funding and Special Fee requests from all Voluntary Student Organizations, and present a recommendation on each to the US.
2. The Appropriations Committee shall consist of a subset of the members of the US.
3. No member of the US shall formulate a recommendation for a request from a VSO of which s/he is a member.
4. The procedure for formulation and review of requests shall be specified in the US Funding Policies.
E. Budget
1. A yearly budget shall be assembled for USGF expenditures and shall be presented to the US body for majority approval.
2. The US Chair, the US Deputy Chair, the Chair of the Appropriations Committee, the US Treasurer, and the FM shall be responsible for assembling the yearly budget.
3. This budget shall be presented no later than at the first meeting of the US during fall quarter of the senatorial term.
4. With the exception of early discretionary funding, the US shall not appropriate any USGF funds until a budget has been passed.
5. The USGF expenditure budget shall include:
   1. A cap on total USGF expenditures.
   2. A monthly guideline for expenditures, with requirements for monthly or quarterly presentations on the activity of the Appropriations Committee to the Senate body by the Chair of the Appropriations Committee.
1. The US shall only exceed the established budget with 2/3 approval for each individual appropriation request.
Section 2: Undergraduate Student General Fee
A. General
1. The terms “Undergraduate Student General Fee” and “USGF” shall be used to refer collectively to all General Fees paid exclusively by undergraduates.
2. The overall budget of the USGF for the current year shall be published in quarterly installments online.
3. Elected and appointed officers and staff members of the Association may inspect and make public the financial records of any VSO receiving funds from the USGF, except as specified in the Constitution, the Association By-Laws and Policies, or these By-Laws.
B. Partitioning of USGF
1. The USGF shall consist of two partitions. The first shall be called the Programming and Community Service Fund, and the second shall be called the Publications Fund.
2. The Programming and Community Service Fund shall consist of the Undergraduate Programming and Community Service fee while the Publications Fund shall consist of the Undergraduate Publications fee.
C. ASSU Publications
1. Definitions
   1. Member Publication
   2. A member publication shall be defined as any VSO registered with the Office of Student Activities as a publications group that has printed an issue in at least one of the three quarters preceding the moment of consideration.
   3. Non-Funded Publication
   4. A non-funded member publication shall be defined as a member publication that has not received any ASSU Publications General Fee funds for at least one quarter preceding the moment in consideration, and that has printed at least one issue in that time without use of Publications General Fee monies.
1. ASSU Publications Director
   1. Selection and Term
      1. The ASSU Publications Director shall be selected Spring Quarter by a committee chosen by the outgoing Publications Director in consultation with the outgoing US Chair, subject to approval by the incoming US.
      2. The ASSU Publications Director shall serve under the governance of the US.
   1. Duties
      1. The ASSU Publications Director shall coordinate and represent the interests of all member publications.
      2. The ASSU Publications Director shall work to develop current publications and assist new ones.
      3. The ASSU Publications Director shall chair both the ASSU Publications Board and the ASSU Publications Funding Committee.
      4. The ASSU Publications Director shall serve as a source of information through which member publications can share experiences and knowledge.
      5. The ASSU Publications Director shall serve as the chief administrator of the Publications Fund.
      6. The ASSU Publications Director shall report to the US the state of the Publications Fund.
      7. The ASSU Publications Director shall inform member publications of their Publications Fund allocation and ensure they receive their funding.
1. ASSU Assistant Publications Director
   1. Selection and Term
      1. The ASSU Assistant Publications Director shall be selected Spring Quarter by the same committee charged with selecting the incoming Publications Director, subject to approval by the incoming US.
      2. The ASSU Assistant Publications Director shall serve at the joint discretion of the Publications Director and the US.
   1. Duties
      1. The ASSU Assistant Publications Director shall serve as a liaison between member publications and the Publications Director.
      2. The ASSU Assistant Publications Director shall be charged with storing records of ASSU Publications General Fee appropriations, in consultation with the ASSU Publications Director.
      3. The ASSU Assistant Publications Director shall be responsible for recording and archiving the proceedings of all meetings of the ASSU Publications Board and the ASSU Publications Funding Committee.
      4. In the event that the ASSU Publications Director is absent, has been suspended, or has been removed, the ASSU Assistant Publications Director shall perform the Director’s duties until the Director returns, the Director’s suspension has been overturned, or a new Director has been appointed.
      5. In the event that the ASSU Assistant Publications Director is absent, has been suspended, or has been removed, the duties of the ASSU Assistant Publications Director shall fall to the ASSU Publications Director.
1. ASSU Publications Board
   1. Selection and Term
   2. The ASSU Publications Board shall be selected at the start of each Autumn Quarter by the leadership of each of the various groups entitled to representation on the Board, pursuant to the criteria defined in section ©. Members of the Publications Board shall be appointed for the full duration of a given academic year, subject to the discretion of each represented group’s leadership.
   3. Duties
      1. To promote a sense of community among the various member publications.
      2. To serve as a centralized forum for discussion of issues germane to the Stanford student publications community.
      3. To facilitate the creation of ad hoc committees consisting of representatives of various publications brought together for the purpose of serving particular needs of the Publications community (including but not limited to the issues of advertising, distribution, layout, and staff training).
      4. To advise and assist the Publications Director in discharging his duties.
      5. To serve as an impartial arbiter in disputes between member publications in cases in which both parties apply to the Board for arbitration.
   1. Membership
   2. Eligibility for membership on the Publications Board belongs to the following: one representative of each member publication, one US representative, one Office of Student Activities representative, the Assistant Publications Director, and the Publications Director.
   3. Procedure
   4. Publication Board meetings should follow the following standard protocol:
      1. Meeting Frequency
         1. Publications Board meetings will take place once every two months, on a date determined by the Publications Director in consultation with the other Publications Board members.
         2. Ad hoc committee meetings will take place on an as-needed basis.
      1. Agenda
         1. At the start of each meeting, a consensus will be reached on issues that will constitute the agenda for the next meeting.
         2. Any member of the Publications Board may propose an agenda item, either via e-mail to the Publications Director or Assistant Publications Director or at a meeting for that meeting or the next meeting.
         3. The Assistant Publications Director and the Publications Director are jointly charged with setting an agenda for meetings of the Publications Board.
         4. For ad hoc committee meetings, the given committee’s chair is charged to work with the Assistant Publications Director to prepare meeting agendas.
         5. The agenda for each meeting will be released via e-mail to all Publications Board members by 11:59PM the day before a meeting.
      1. Decisions
         1. Unless otherwise stated, decisions of the Publications Board are taken by consensus.
         2. Decisions of the Publications Board and its ad hoc committees may be either advisory or binding. After each decision of the Publications Board is made, another decision should immediately be made as to the advisory or binding nature of the decision.
1. ASSU Publications Funding Committee
   1. Selection and Term
   2. The ASSU Publications Funding Committee shall be selected at the start of each Autumn Quarter by the leadership of each of the various groups entitled to representation on the Committee, pursuant to the criteria defined in section ©. Members of the Publications Funding Committee shall be appointed for the full duration of a given academic year, subject to the discretion of each represented group’s leadership.
   3. Duties
   4. The Funding Committee is charged with administration of the Publications General Fee funds. To this end, the Committee shall each year, as early as is practicable, release a set of general criteria for funding interviews. The Funding Committee is also empowered to create ad hoc committees in emergency situations when decision-making by the Publications Board proves impracticable, where “impracticability” will be determined at the discretion of the Publications Director.
   5. Membership
      1. The membership of the Funding Committee is as follows: one representative of each non-funded member publication, one US representative, one Office of Student Activities representative, the Assistant Publications Director, and the Publications Director.
      2. A non-funded member publication may lose its non-funded status in a number of ways – loss of Special Fees or loss of outside funding leading to a request to the Publications Funding Committee for supplemental or emergency funding.
      3. In such cases, a member publication will once again qualify for non-funded status provided that it
         1. has gone at least one full quarter without receiving ASSU Publications General Fee monies and
         2. has printed at least one issue without use of Publications General Fee monies in that time.
   1. Procedure
      1. Meeting Frequency
      2. Funding Committee meetings will take place once every two weeks, on a day determined by the Publications Director in consultation with the other Funding Committee members.
      3. Agenda
         1. Any member of the Publications Funding Committee may propose an agenda item, either via e-mail to the Assistant Publications Director or at a meeting for that meeting or the next meeting.
         2. The Assistant Publications Director and the Publications Director are jointly charged with setting an agenda for meetings of the Funding Committee.
         3. The agenda for each meeting will be released via e-mail to all Funding Committee members by 11:59PM the day before a meeting.
      1. Decisions
         1. Unless otherwise stated, decisions of the Publications Funding Committee are taken by consensus.
         2. Decisions of the Funding Committee are binding in all cases, subject to registration of a complaint with the Publications Director. Any Funding Committee member may file such a complaint. Means of response are at the discretion of the Publications Director.
1. The Funding Process
   1. Eligibility
   2. Any student organization registered with the OSA and not receiving Special Fees may request funding from the ASSU Publications General Fee for the printing of any regular printed publication, the terms of which will be defined in the individual funding guidelines of the Publications Funding Committee.
   3. Applications
   4. To be reviewed, ASSU Publications funding and publications Special Fee requests shall contain the following information, in separate sections:
      1. For Publications General Fee funding requests:
         1. The name of the member publication requesting funds.
         2. The name(s), email address(es), and phone number(s) of the representative(s) of the member publication making the request.
         3. The ASSU account number of the member publication.
         4. A certification that the publication will comply with all terms and conditions for use of funds specified in the Constitution, the Association By-Laws and Policies, the US By-Laws and Policies, and the allocation approved by the US.
      1. For publications Special Fee requests:
         1. The name of the member publication requesting the fee.
         2. The name(s), email address(es), and phone number(s) of the representative(s) of the member publication make the request.
         3. The ASSU account number of the member publication.
         4. A brief description of the nature of the publication, planned circulation and distribution, and plans for current and future growth.
         5. A budget, following the format of the sample budget provided by the ASSU Publications Director, containing the following:
         6. The time period for which the allocation would be effective
         7. An itemization of all sources of funding and all expenses.
         8. Line item numbers as defined by the Students' Organizations Fund.
         9. A description of each line item as necessary.
   1. Guide
   2. To assist member publications in the preparation of Publications General Fee applications, the ASSU Publications Funding Committee shall publish a guide describing the goals of ASSU Publications, the terms and conditions for use of ASSU Publications General Fee funds, and all application procedures, and containing a sample application and funding agreement form.
   3. Applications
   4. Applications shall be kept on file and made available by the ASSU Publications Director and Assistant Publications Director.
   5. Recommendations
   6. The Publications Funding Committee shall prepare a brief recommendation to the US regarding each proposal. At the first US meeting after the preparation of the recommendation, the ASSU Publications Director shall summarize the application and present the Committee's recommendations for US approval.
1. Terms and Conditions for Use of Funds
   1. Notification
   2. The ASSU Publications Director shall notify a member publication when funds become available to it.
   3. Extensions
   4. The US Chair may, at her/his discretion, grant extensions to the ending date of an allocation to ensure that all transactions are cleared. No extension may be granted beyond the end of the fiscal year to which the allocation applies.
   5. Reclamation
   6. Unless otherwise specified by the US, title to all tangible property purchased, in whole or in part, through the use of funds from the USGF shall vest with the ASSU, and possession shall devolve upon the ASSU in the event of the dissolution of the member publication possessing the property.
   7. Dissolution
      1. A member publication shall be considered to be dissolved upon the receipt of a declaration of dissolution by its membership, failure to register with the Office of Student Activities for 15 months, or after a declaration of dissolution by the US following reasonable efforts to contact the last known officers of the member publication.
      2. All allocations to a member publication shall end upon dissolution of that member publication.
      3. The allocation of facilities to a member publication shall remain fixed, as per current facilities usage, until such time as that member publication is considered to be dissolved.
   1. Co-Sponsorship
   2. Member publications funded by the USGF shall cite ASSU Publications as a sponsor or co-sponsor.
   3. Maximum Limit of Appropriations
   4. The maximum amount of funds from the USGF that may be allocated to an undergraduate member publication in a single fiscal year is $6,000.
1. Verification
   1. Follow-Up Report
   2. A member publication receiving an allocation shall submit a follow-up report to the ASSU Publications Director within two weeks of the end of the allocation. The follow-up report shall include copies of all issues of the member publication published during the time period for which the allocation was effective (for the purposes of the ASSU Publications archives), as well as an itemization of the actual expenses incurred by the member publication.
   3. Evaluation
      1. The US Appropriations Committee may seek independent reports regarding a member publication that has been allocated funds from the USGF.
      2. The US Appropriations Committee may recommend disciplinary actions to the US regarding member publications that have been allocated funds from the USGF as it sees fit, in order to protect the reputation and operations of member publications.
1. File
Follow-up reports shall be kept on file and made available by the ASSU Publications 
Director and the Assistant Publications Director.




















































Article IV: Elections
Section 1. General
This article of these By-Laws shall have no jurisdiction over any election held under the terms of Article VI of the Association Constitution.
Section 2. Certification of Election Results
A. Definition of Certification
1. A result of a US election, or portion thereof, shall be certified upon the approval of a recommendation of certification by the US. Certifications may not be rescinded or reconsidered.
2. The recommendation shall take the form of a bill submitted by the Elections Commission specifying:
   1. The number of votes cast for the appropriate candidate;
   2. The requirements for certification of this result as specified in the Constitution, the Association By-Laws, these By-Laws, the Association Elections Polices, or the US Elections Polices;
   3. Any other information deemed appropriate by the Commission.
1. An election may only be certified at a regular meeting of the US at least one, but not more than five, weeks after the end of the election. Should the US fail to hold a vote regarding certification within the five-week period, then the election shall be automatically certified.
2. No candidate may be certified if the US has approved an appropriate resolution of disqualification.
3. No member of the US shall take office unless and until the appropriate election result has been certified.
4. The Elections Commission shall verify the eligibility of each candidate before submitting a certification bill to the US.
B. Refusal of Certification
1. The US shall not certify an election in which there were cases of voter fraud or voter disenfranchisement as defined by the Association By-Laws.
2. The US shall not certify an election that was conducted in a partisan manner by the elections officers or an election that was not in accordance with the Constitution.
3. Should the US vote against certification of an election, then the Elections Commission shall hold new elections, using the procedures outlined in the Association By-Laws for invalidated elections.
Section 3: Resolution of Ties
A. Definition
1. A tie shall exist when the US is unable to certify US election results in a manner that shall fill all fifteen seats in the US.
2. A class shall be defined as Freshman, Sophomore, Junior, and Senior, as determined by the form of ballot a voter chooses. Undergraduate Coterminal students shall be assumed to be Seniors.
B. Procedure
1. The US shall certify the election of all US candidates that do not involve ties before any tie is resolved.
2. The Elections Commissioner shall present along with US election vote totals, the breakdown of each tied candidate’s votes by class.
3. The US shall certify the election of the candidate with the most evenly distributed vote total among the four classes. In the event of multiple ties, this procedure shall be repeated until all ties are resolved.
4. In the event the procedure above cannot settle all ties, each candidate involved in an unresolved tie shall be allowed to speak and answer questions before the US. The US shall vote on each tied issue, the result resolving the tie.






























Article V: Proposed Judicial Changes
Section 1: Review of Draft and Proposed Judicial Changes
A.
Proposed judicial changes shall consist of the following:
1. Amendments to the Judicial Charter, which require US approval.
2. New or modified Judicial Board By-Laws, which may be vetoed by the US.
3. New or modified provisions of the Student Conduct Penalty Code, which may be vetoed by the US.
4. Any other changes related to the University judicial process, which require the approval of, or may be vetoed by, the US.
B.
Draft judicial changes shall consist of non-finalized versions of any potential proposed judicial change, i.e. those which have not yet been formally approved by the relevant judicial body.
C.
Judicial Review Committee
1. Upon receipt of a notice of a draft or proposed judicial change, the US shall form a Judicial Review Committee, hereafter referred to as a JRC. The JRC shall consist of all US members interested in reviewing the judicial changes.
2. The JRC shall select its own Chair and determine its own procedures.
3. The JRC is encouraged to contact the judicial body proposing the judicial changes to discuss any concerns that arise, particularly if it plans to recommend that the judicial changes be rejected. In the latter case, the JRC is encouraged to work with the relevant judicial body to develop mutually acceptable revisions of the judicial changes.
4. The JRC shall report back to the US in a timely manner with its recommendations for the judicial changes, along with the reasons for the recommendations. If the JRC recommends that a judicial change should be vetoed, the recommendation should include a description of the modifications that would be required for the JRC to recommend approval.
Section 2: Consideration of Draft and Proposed Judicial Changes
A.
The US shall consider the JRC’s recommendations, in the form of a bill that lists each judicial change as a separate item. This bill must be previous-noticed and contain the complete text of the JRC’s recommendations.
B.
Failure to consider a given judicial change bill shall not be equivalent to approval of that bill, or of any of the judicial changes in it.
C.
Each proposed judicial change must be approved by a 2/3 vote, or else it shall be considered vetoed.
D.
Draft judicial changes may be provisionally approved or vetoed. Such action shall serve only to indicate to the relevant judicial body the US’s position on the current language of the judicial change.
E.
A provisional approval/veto of a draft judicial change binds the US as to eventual approval or rejection of the corresponding proposed judicial change only if the language of the proposed judicial change is identical to the corresponding draft judicial change.










Appendix I: Election Policies
Section 1: General
These Policies shall apply only to those candidates, slates, special fee requests, and sponsors whose election issues can be voted upon exclusively by members of the undergraduate population.
Section 2: Candidates
A. Members of the US
1. Any members of the undergraduate population declaring intent to become a member of the US, and requesting to appear in the Elections Handbook and on the ballot, must submit to the Elections Commission a petition of at least 100 members of the undergraduate population.
2. The Senate may unanimously vote to send any upperclass candidate (designated as such in the Elections Handbook), to the Elections Commission to have their status as an upperclass candidate reviewed. The Elections Commission will then have the authority to remove the designation of “upperclass candidate” as defined in Article II, Section 3.A.3 of the ASSU Constitution.
3. Candidates who do not meet the definition of “upperclass candidate” in Article II, Section 3.A.3 of the ASSU Constitution may not petition the Elections Commission to be designated as upperclass candidates. Disputes regarding the definition of “upperclass candidate” shall be resolved by the ASSU Constitutional Council.
4. If the Elections Commission removes the designation of upperclass candidate, the candidate in question is still eligible to run as an at-large candidate, but cannot be treated as an upperclass candidate for the purposes of Article II Section 3.A of the ASSU Constitution, regardless of their academic status as defined by the University Registrar.
B. Class Presidents
1. Any members of the undergraduate population declaring intent to become Class Presidents, and requesting to appear in the Elections Handbook and on the ballot, must submit to the Elections Commission a petition of at least 100 members of the undergraduate population.
2. There shall be Sophomore, Junior, and Senior Class Presidents. The Class Presidents will be elected during the Spring General Election. Students may vote for the Class Presidents for only one class, and candidates for Sophomore and Senior Class Presidents shall be slates of four people. Slates for Junior Class Presidents may have up to six people, on the condition that at least four of them are present on campus at any given time during the term of office.
3. To the extent that it is possible, the only students who will run or vote for a given Class President slate will be students in the class immediately below (i.e. only freshmen will run or vote for Sophomore Class Presidents). Because it may not be possible to accurately determine the class to which a given student belongs, the Elections Commission shall err on the side of allowing students to declare what class they belong to. For the purposes of this subsection, a student's class shall be the one which they identify themselves with socially, which may or may not be the same as the class status assigned to them by the University Registrar.
4. Instant Runoff Voting (hereafter “IRV”) shall be used in elections for Class Presidents as defined by the following procedure:
   1. Should a slate receive a majority of the vote, the US shall certify the election of that slate.
   2. Should no slate receive a majority of the vote, there shall be successive IRV rounds using the rankings on voters’ ballots cast in a General Election.
   3. In each IRV round, the highest-ranked valid votes on voters’ ballots shall be tallied, and the slate with the fewest votes shall be eliminated. Votes for that slate shall not be considered valid in subsequent rounds. If no valid choice is indicated on a ballot, then that ballot shall be removed from subsequent tallies.
   4. IRV rounds shall be repeated until one slate remains. The US shall certify the election of that slate as the Class Presidents.
1. If resolution of a tie vote is necessary to determine the slate to be eliminated in a given round of the instant runoff, the tie shall be resolved by eliminating the tied slate that had the fewest votes in successively previous rounds until the tie is resolved or all previous rounds have been considered. If the tie cannot be resolved by this method, it shall be resolved by utilizing the same procedure specified for resolving US ties.
Section 3: US Oath of Office
The following shall be the oath of office for the members of the US:
“I, (name), do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the duties of the office of Undergraduate Senator of the Associated Students of Stanford University; that I take this obligation freely; that I will advocate for and serve the interests of the entire undergraduate population; and that I will uphold the Constitution of the Associated Students of Stanford University.”






Appendix II: Funding Policies
Section 1: Funding Coordinator
A. Selection and Term
1. The Funding Coordinator shall be selected Spring Quarter by the incoming US Chair, subject to approval by the incoming US.
2. The Funding Coordinator shall serve at the pleasure of the US.
B. Duties
1. The Funding Coordinator shall serve as the chief administrator of the Programming and Community Service Fund.
2. The Funding Coordinator shall solicit, monitor, assist, and analyze VSO applications to the Programming and Community Service Fund.
3. The Funding Coordinator shall report to the US the state of the Programming and Community Service Fund.
4. The Funding Coordinator shall inform VSO of their Programming and Community Service Fund allocation and ensure they receive their funding.
Section 2: Application Procedure
A. Programming and Community Service Fund
1. The Programming and Community Service Fund shall be used for allocation to undergraduate student organizations.
2. Voluntary Student Organizations seeking funds from the Programming and Community Service Fund shall submit a funding request to the Appropriations Committee.
3. Voluntary Student Organizations seeking funds from the Programming and Community Service Fund shall have the right to send a representative to any US or Appropriations Committee meeting at which their funding allocations are discussed.
4. No funds from the Programming and Community Service Fund may be allocated to a group that is not a Voluntary Student Organization registered with the Office of Student Activities.
5. No funds from the Programming and Community Service Fund may be allocated to a student organization that is not an undergraduate student organization.
6. No funds from the Programming and Community Service Fund may be allocated to a group that receives funds from a Special Fee levied, in whole or in part, on the undergraduate population.
7. The US reserves the right to cancel or suspend an allocation if the funds are not being used within the specifications of the allocation.
8. Modifications of the specifications of an allocation, excluding the total amount allocated, may be made at the discretion of the US. Modifications of the total amount may be made by the Usual Method for Approving Allocations.
9. The total amount allocated to each Voluntary Student Organization, and summary of the budget associated with the allocation, shall be published in the next Elections Handbook.
B. Requests
To be reviewed by the Appropriations Committee, funding and Special Fee requests shall contain the following information, in separate sections:
1. For USGF funding requests:
   1. The name of the organization requesting funds.
   2. The name(s), email address(es), and phone number(s) of the member(s) making the request.
   3. The Association account number for the organization.
   4. A certification that the organization will comply with all terms and conditions for use of funds specified in the Constitution, the Association By-Laws and Policies, and the US By-Laws and Policies; and the allocation approved by the US.
1. For Special Fee requests:
   1. The name of the organization requesting the fee.
   2. The name(s), email address(es), and phone number(s) of the member(s) making the request.
   3. The Association account number for the organization.
   4. A signed contract specifying that the group receiving special fee agrees to cover all refunds in excess of their allocated refund buffer (set by the Association FM).
   5. Groups applying for special fees from both Graduate and Undergraduate populations (hereafter referred to as joint groups) shall submit a pre-proposal to each legislative body. The criteria for this pre-proposal shall be developed by each legislative body and passed to groups through the elections commission.
1. A brief description of the group, including a list of previous major activities (if any) and an estimated percentage of its active participants that are members of the undergraduate population.
2. A budget, following the format of the sample provided by the Appropriations Committee. It shall contain:
   1. The time period for which the allocation would be effective.
   2. An itemization of all sources of funding and all expenses.
   3. A breakdown of expenses for each specific activity of the organization.
   4. Line item numbers as defined by the Students' Organizations Fund.
   5. Description of each line item as necessary.
1. Answers to the following questions:
   1. How does the organization pursue the goals of the Programming and Community Service Fund?
   2. How do the activities to be funded pursue the goals of the Programming and Community Service Fund?
   3. From what other sources is the organization obtaining or seeking funds?
C. Guide
To assist organizations in the preparation of applications, the Appropriations Committee shall publish a guide describing the goals of the Programming and Community Service Fund, terms and conditions for use of funds, and all application procedures, and containing a sample application and funding agreement form.


The Committee shall only recommend an allocation of money from a General Fee to a Group if that group fits the statement of purpose for that fee.
D. Applications
Applications shall be kept on file and made available by the US Chair and US Deputy Chair.
Section 3: Review Procedure
A. Recommendations
The Committee shall prepare a brief recommendation to the US regarding each proposal. At the first US meeting after preparation of the recommendation, the Committee shall summarize the application and present its recommendation.


In evaluating special fee applications the Appropriations Committee should include in their considerations the following criteria before recommending placement on the ballot
1. Evaluation of outside revenue
2. Impact on student body and/or community impact
3. Benefit to undergraduate population, past and future
4. Past performance/budgeting, refund rates
5. Affect on total amount of Association Fee for each undergraduate
6. Established funding polices for each line-item
Section 4: Terms and Conditions for Use of Funds
A. Notification
The Funding Coordinator shall notify an organization when funds become available to it.
B. Extensions
The US Chair may, at his/her discretion, grant extensions to the ending date of an allocation to ensure that all transactions are cleared. No extension may be granted beyond the end of the fiscal year to which the allocation applies.
C. Reclamation
Unless otherwise specified by the US, title to all tangible property purchased, in whole or in part, through the use of funds from the USGF, shall vest with the Association, and possession shall devolve upon the Association in the event of the dissolution of the VSO possessing the property.
D. Dissolution
A VSO shall be considered to be dissolved upon the receipt of a declaration of dissolution by its membership, failure to register with the Office of Student Activities for 15 months, or after a declaration of dissolution by the US following reasonable efforts to contact the last known officers of the VSO. All allocations to a VSO shall end upon dissolution of that VSO.
E. Co-Sponsorship
Advertisements for events funded by the USGF shall cite the US as a sponsor or cosponsor.
F. Maximum Limit of Appropriations
The maximum amount of funds from the USGF that may be allocated to an undergraduate student organization in a single fiscal year is $6,000. An additional $1,000 may be allocated for community service expenses, on top of the base maximum of $6,000.
Section 5: Verification
The Appropriations Committee may seek independent reports on the success of an organization's activities from those who attended one or more of those activities. The Committee may arrange to send volunteers to gather information for such a report.
Section 6: Collection Schedule
Equal fractions of all fees shall be collected in the Fall, Winter, and Spring Quarters. No fee shall be collected in the Summer Quarter.
Section 7: Undergraduate General Fee Reserve Expenditures
A. Expenditures out of the General Fee Reserve Accounts
There are two allowed expenditures out of the General Fee Reserve. Both require a 2/3 vote of all voting members of the US to pass.
1. The US may, in considering a Service Project (as defined in Article IX of the Association By-Laws) to be funded through Special Fees, allocate the amount that would have otherwise been in the Special Fee request out of the General Fee Reserve as a one-time expenditure to determine the viability of the project in a given year.
2. The US may allocate funds out of the General Fee Reserve for the purpose of a long-term investment that benefits Stanford students. Such long term investments fall into two major categories: capital expenditures and infrastructure improvements.
3. Any such expenditure bill must show:
   1. How the expenditure benefits Stanford students and Stanford student groups
   2. How the expenditure falls into one of the two categories outlined above
   3. The specific amount that will be taken from each reserve account (subject to lower limit restrictions outlined in section B)
   4. How the expenses are in line with the statement of purpose for each general fee reserve account from which funds will be spent
1. The US may, at the request of the Appropriations Committee, allocate more than the General Fee allocation for a given year to student groups through the regular appropriations process, with the idea in mind that this “overallocation” shall reduce but not eliminate the net income accruing to the reserve for that year due to money returned from student group accounts. A more specific policy on this type of expenditure may be set by the Appropriations Committee for a given fiscal year.
2. In reviewing either of these types of expenses, the US shall employ a heightened standard of review. These expenses are not meant to be made frivolously or easily, and should require time and deliberation by the US before ultimate passage. In the end, expenditures should only be passed if they can be shown to have a significant impact on the Stanford community, given the amount of money that is spent. All expenditures passed should be shown to be difficult to achieve through any other means of funding, since this policy is meant to authorize expenditures that could not be funded in any other way.
B. Limits on General Fee Reserve Account Spending
The Financial Manager of the Association, in conjunction with the chair of the US Appropriations Committee Chair, shall agree upon a maximum amount that can be spent out of each General Fee Reserve Account on item (1) above for each fiscal year. This limit shall become effective upon its announcement at a regular meeting of the US. Should the Financial Manager and Appropriations Chair be unable to agree, the US shall set this amount by majority vote at a regular meeting. The US may not pass a bill that spends a given General Fee Reserve account beyond this specified level, unless the US passes, by a 2/3 vote of all voting members, one of the following two justifications for such an expenditure:
1. A “Statement of compelling interest” that shows how much more the project in question would benefit the Stanford community as proposed than if it were consistent with the established spending limit.
2. A “Finding of a State of Emergency.” A “State of Emergency” is here defined as a crisis, primarily of a fiscal nature, in which the Association has outstanding financial obligations that:
   1. Would compromise the health of the Association if not met
   2. Cannot be met through expenditures out of operating funds in the annual budget
   3. Any finding of a state of emergency must contain:
   4. A list of conditions that create a state of emergency, as defined above
   5. The amount and nature of the expenditures necessary
   6. The general fee reserve account or accounts that will be used for these expenditures
In addition, the US may, by a 2/3 vote of all voting members, change the upper spending limit arrived at by the Appropriations Chair and Financial Manager.


Note that item (2) above is not covered by this limitation, specifically because expenditures covered under this item may be much larger and require a great deal of deliberation by the US and input from the Financial Manager before passage. For item (2) expenditures, the ultimate guardian against frivolous spending shall be the US itself.


Section 8: Undergraduate General Fee Reserve Expenditures
A. Budget Modifications
1. The Financial Manager is empowered to dispense with all budget modification requests as they see fit, but must make decisions according to relevant policies outlined in ASSU governing documents.
2. As outlined in the Joint Bylaws, budget modifications that significantly change the scope and nature of allocations made by initiative or referendum shall not be entertained by the Undergraduate Senate and the Financial Manager of the Association shall not have the power to authorize said budget modifications.
Appendix III: Online Meetings Policies
Section 1: Spirit of an Online Meeting
The online meeting is to be used as a means to resolve any issue that has arisen unexpectedly in a short timeline. The purpose of an online meeting is not to discuss contentious issues. All other means, including a physical meeting, must be considered before calling an online meeting. All rules that apply to actual meetings should apply to online meetings, such as giving 72 hours public notice and providing previous notice for all bills.
Section 2: Protocol for Online Meetings
1. Chair calls meeting to order.
2. Roll Call
3. Chair asks for acceptance of the agenda.
4. Chair must remind participants that excessive discussion is not encouraged and that any motions to table will be honored. Only questions of clarification will be accepted.
5. Chair recognizes presenter of bill.
6. Chair opens floor for questions of clarification.
7. Chair asks if there are any motions to table.
8. Vote is taken for presented bill.






Appendix IV: Statements of Purpose of the Undergraduate General Fees
Section 1: General
These policies are simply a listing of the statements of purpose of the Undergraduate General Fees. As per Article V, Section 1, Subsection B.2 of the Association Constitution, the statement of purpose of each General Fee may only be amended by a vote of 2/3 of the undergraduate population, and if those in favor make up 15 percent of the undergraduate population. The statements are listed here solely for reference purposes.
Section 2: Statements of Purpose
A. Programming and Community Service General Fee
Levied on the undergraduate population, it shall fund the basic operating, programming, and community service expenses of student organizations with a substantial undergraduate membership, except for student publications and for organizations receiving Special Fees.
B. Publications General Fee
Levied on the undergraduate population, it shall fund the basic operation and publishing expenses of member publications with a substantial undergraduate membership, that do not receive Special Fees.