The Rules of Order of the Undergraduate Senate
History of the Rules of Order Fall 2010
Created by the 12th Undergraduate Senate. Fall 2013: Amended by the 15th Undergraduate Senate
Rule of Order 1 
Order of Business The order of business for each meeting of the Undergraduate Senate and its constituent committees and subcommittees, except when otherwise specified, shall be as follows:
1. Call to Order
2. Roll Call
3. Approval of the Minutes of the Previous Meeting
4. Acceptance of the Orders of the Day and Action Calendar
5. Old Business
6. Open Forum
7. Report of the Executive of the Association
8. Report of the Financial Manager
9. Reports of Association Committees and Departments
10. Report of the Presiding Officer
11. Report of the Deputy Chair 
12. Report of the US Committees 
13. New Business
14. Final Comments
15.  Adjournment
Items 7, 8, 9 and 12 shall be omitted for meetings of the committees and subcommittees of the Undergraduate Senate.
Explanations of Items Reports should be made by the head of a Department or the chair of a Committee, or a member of the Department or Committee designated by the chair or head of the body. Written summaries of Oral reports shall be included in the agenda packets, if available before the meeting. The Presiding Officer shall entertain questions from the members of the Undergraduate Senate and direct them to the individual making the report after each written and/or oral report has been concluded.
Any member of the Undergraduate Senate may, at any time at least one minute after the beginning of an oral report, interrupt the speaker and call for an ending of the report and questioning. If this motion passes, then the next item of business in the Orders of the Day shall be considered. No action items shall be considered at this time, unless otherwise specifically provided for in these Rules.
All original main motions shall be considered action items. Action items shall be considered in the order presented in the Action Calendar.
For meetings of the Undergraduate Senate, in the event that the Chair of the Senate is unable to be present at a meeting of the Undergraduate Senate, the Deputy Chair of the Senate shall act as Presiding Officer. In the event that neither the Chair nor the Deputy Chair, another member of the Executive Committee shall act as Presiding Officer.
For meetings of committees and subcommittees of the Undergraduate Senate, in the event that the Chair of the committee is unable to be present at a meeting, the Deputy Chair of the Committee shall act as Presiding Officer for meetings of committees and subcommittees of the Undergraduate Senate. In the event that neither the Chair nor the Deputy Chair, the Chair of the Senate or Deputy Chair shall act as Presiding Officer.
1. Call to Order At the time the meeting is scheduled to begin, the Presiding Officer shall call the meeting to order.
2. Roll Call At each meeting, the Presiding Officer shall call the roll to determine which members of the Undergraduate Senate/committee are present and which are absent. It is the duty of any member arriving after the roll call to alert the Presiding Officer of their presence.
3. Approval of the Minutes of the Previous Meeting Any meeting minutes which were not approved at the last meeting of the Undergraduate Senate/committee shall be presented for approval. Any corrections shall be incorporated into the minutes of the current meeting.
4. Acceptance of the Orders of the Day and Action Calendar Before each meeting the Presiding Officer shall prepare a tentative order of business, as well as a Calendar of Action items for which approval of the Undergraduate Senate/committee is sought. This Action Calendar shall enumerate the main motions that appear in appropriate written form in the agenda packet. The entries shall be arranged in the order that they will be considered during the meeting, and each entry shall specify its originator and the vote required for approval. These must be accepted as is, or as amended, by the Undergraduate Senate/committee before it can proceed with any other business except an adjournment due to lack of a quorum.
5. Action Items / Old Business Any action item that was under consideration at the previous meeting when it adjourned, and any action item scheduled to be considered at the previous meeting but not considered before adjourning, shall be considered an Action Item or Old Business.
6. Open Forum Any member of the Stanford Community may address the Undergraduate Senate/committee on their topic of choice. Any written materials shall be distributed via the agenda packet, if available before the meeting. No speaker may, initially, address the Association legislative bodies for more than 5 minutes, unless a majority of the Senate votes to allow the speaker to continue. After this address, the Presiding Officer shall entertain questions from those present at the meeting and direct them to the speaker for a period not to exceed 5 minutes. The Presiding Officer shall schedule all speakers, with absolute priority given to individuals who are not elected representatives of the Association. This period shall not exceed 30 minutes, unless a majority of the Senate votes to allow more speakers.
7. Report of the Executive of the Association The President shall report to the Association legislative bodies on the status of Association issues, and any other matter brought to the attention of the Executive Committee. The President may assign any or all of this reporting time to any other member(s) of the Executive Committee. This time shall not exceed 15 minutes.
8. Report of the Financial Manager The Financial Manager shall report to the Association legislative bodies on matters concerning the general finances of the Association, the operation of the Business Projects, the Students' Organizations Fund, and any other matter charged to the Financial Manager. This time shall not exceed 15 minutes.
9. Reports of the Association Committees and Departments Each Department Head or Chair of an Association Committee may, at this time, report to the Association legislative bodies on any matter within the charge of that Department/Committee. The Department Head/Committee Chair reporting shall, during the time of their report, be granted the rights and privileges of an ex-officio member of an Association legislative body. Each committee report shall not exceed 10 minutes.
10.  Report of the Presiding Officer The Chair shall report on matters pertaining to the duties of the Chair of the Undergraduate Senate/committee and the overall workings of the Undergraduate Senate/committee. The Presiding Officer’s report shall not exceed 10 minutes.
11. Report of the Deputy Chair The Deputy Chair shall report on matters pertaining to the duties of the Deputy Chair of the Undergraduate Senate/committee and the overall workings of the Undergraduate Senate/committee. The Deputy Chair’s report shall not exceed 10 minutes.
12. Report of the US Committees The Chair, or designee of the Committee, may at this time, report to the Undergraduate Senate on any matter or motion within the charge of that Committee. Each Committee report shall not exceed 5 minutes.
13. Previous Notice / New Business Any action item included under this heading when the Action Calendar was accepted, and any action item not appearing on the Action Calendar introduced by any member shall be considered New Business and be placed on previous notice.
14. Final Comments No action items shall be in order at this time. The Presiding Officer may recognize members of the Association legislative bodies to speak on any topic of their choice. No member of an Association legislative body may speak more than twice, nor for longer than 2 minutes each time.
15. Adjournment
Rule of Order 2: Definition and Form of Motions, Bills, Resolutions, and Orders 
1. All original main motions, except those having to do with the appointment of members of an Association legislative body and Association Officers and those dealing with the rules of procedure or administration of the Association legislative bodies, shall be in the form of a bill, resolution, or order.
2. All legislation for referral to a Committee shall be in the form of a bill, resolution, or order.
3. A bill consists of zero or more inducement paragraphs as follows: “WHEREAS,...;”, followed by a single enactment clause followed by the legislation to be enacted as follows: "Be it enacted by the Undergraduate Senate that..."
4. All actions taken with respect to the allocation of the handling of money shall be in the form of a bill.
5. All bills and orders shall designate the appropriate officers and/or offices to discharge the specific provisions of the bill.
6. A resolution consists of zero or more inducement paragraphs as follows: "Whereas,...;", followed by one or more enactment paragraphs as follows: "Be it resolved by the Legislative Bodies of the Association that...;", except the last enactment paragraph, which ends with a period(.). Inducement paragraphs may be connected by the word "and", and the last inducement paragraph and the first enactment paragraph may be connected by the word "therefore", and enactment paragraphs may be connected by the word "and".
7. An order consists of zero or more inducement paragraphs as follows: "Whereas...;", followed by one or more enactment paragraphs as follows: "Be it ordered by the Legislative Bodies of the Association that...;", except that the last enactment paragraph, which ends with a period (.). Inducement paragraphs may be connected by the word "and", the last inducement paragraph and the first enactment paragraph may be connected by the word "therefore", and enactment paragraphs may be connected by the word "and".
Rule of Order 3: Authors and Sponsors 
1. All bills, resolutions, and orders shall have at least one author, and may have one or more sponsors.
2. Any member of the Association may author bills, resolutions, and orders. Any member of an Association legislative body may sponsor bills, resolutions, and orders. At least one member of an Association legislative body must sponsor or author each bill, resolution, or order.
3. The name of the author(s) and sponsor(s) of each bill, resolution, and order shall appear with the bill, resolution, or order.
4. In the case of a bill, resolution, or order drafted by a Committee, the Committee, or in their absence the Committee Chair, shall be responsible for designating the author(s) of the bill, resolution, or order.
Rule of Order 4: Assignment of the Floor 
1. The Presiding Officer shall maintain a speaking order of those seeking to claim the floor. To be added to the speaking order, or to claim the floor, a member of the Undergraduate Senate or general Stanford Community shall raise their hand and be recognized by the Presiding Officer. At no time may the Presiding Officer refuse to recognize an elected representative of the Association.
2. Author(s) of the action item currently being considered, and the representative of the body which reported that item to the Association legislative bodies (if any), shall be accorded priority for the purposes of accepting friendly amendments, answering questions, clarifying matters of fact, and making procedural motions (other than the motion of the previous question) intended either to maintain orderly debate or to expedite the consideration of the action item.
3. No individual shall speak for longer than 2 minutes, including periods during which the floor is yielded to another individual, before relinquishing the floor to another individual. The reading of a Bill/Resolution/Order or Report from a member shall not be included in this time. After introducing an action item, the speaker may speak for no longer than 2 additional minutes, including periods during which the floor is yielded to another member, before relinquishing the floor to another member.
4. The Presiding Officer may allow a vote on a call to question at any time.
5. Upon presentation of a visual or audial warning, the Presiding Officer may end any individual’s speaking time for conduct the Presiding Officer deems insulting, discourteous, or bad-mannered. The individual’s speaking time may be reinstated by a majority vote of the Senate. The decision to end speaking time is not equivalent to ending the previous question. The Presiding Officer is not allowed to end any individual’s speaking time if they are making a motion.
Rule of Order 5:
This is Rule of Order 5
Rule of Order 6: Yielding the Floor 
1. An elected representative of the Association assigned the floor may yield all or a portion of their time to another elected representative of the Association. The individual yielded to shall not make any motion except for requests and inquiries, points of order, and questions of privilege, and shall not yield to any other individual.
2. A member may interrupt a person who has the floor and request her/him to yield the floor for a specific purpose. The person who has the floor may refuse to yield. A request to yield the floor shall be in order only for the purposes of making a comment on or of asking the yielder a question relating to her/his contribution to debate.
3. A member assigned the floor may yield all or a portion of her/his time to any individual, provided that the intent of the yielding is to solicit relevant factual information that may best be presented in this manner.
Rule of Order 7: Acceptance of Modifications to a Motion
At any time before a vote has begun on a motion for which amendments are allowed the author(s) and the maker of the motion may agree to a germane modification of the motion (a friendly amendment), provided that this modification was not previously entertained by the Association legislative bodies and either approved or defeated.
________________
Rule of Order 8: Division of a Resolution or Order 
At any time before a vote is ordered on a resolution or order, any voting member of an Association legislative body, without seeking recognition, may request that separate votes be taken on each inducement paragraph and each enactment paragraph. If the request is supported by 3 additional voting members of Association legislative bodies then the Association legislative bodies shall proceed to vote on each paragraph separately and then vote on the resolution or order less those paragraphs which failed on the separate votes.
Rule of Order 9: Division of a Bill 
At any time during debate any member may obtain the floor and request that items contained in a bill be considered separately. If the bill consists exclusively of allocations of funds, or approvals of budgets (or modifications thereto), nominations, appointments to/removals from office, or placement on the ballot of ballot measures, then an "item" shall be defined to be an individual allocation of funds, line item of a budget, nomination, or appointment to/removal from office; or the placement on the ballot of an individual ballot measure.
For all other bills, an "item" shall be defined to be a portion of the bill which has no intrinsic relation to other portions of the bill. This condition must be verified by either the author(s) of the bill, the Committee reporting the bill, or the Executive Committee. Only upon such verification shall the motion to divide be in order. Under no circumstances shall an enactment clause be considered a separate item from the provision in the bill to which it pertains.
Rule of Order 10: Special Fee Requests 
A motion to place a joint Special Fee request on the ballot, or to divide a joint Special Fee request, shall only be in order if the Chair of the US Appropriations Committee, the US Chair, the GSC Chair, and the GSC Financial Officer had been notified in writing at least 7 days before the day of the meeting at which the motion is made, of if the Executive Committee reports such a motion.
Rule of Order 11: Methods of Voting 
1. The normal method of voting is by voice.
2. Unless otherwise specified in the Constitution, the Association By-Laws, the US By-Laws, or these Rules, passage requirements shall apply to the Undergraduate Senate as a whole.
3. A hand vote is a vote by a show of hands where the number of yea, nays, and abstentions are counted and recorded. The Presiding Officer can order a hand vote. Any voting member of the Undergraduate Senate can request a hand vote, and the support of another voting member of the Undergraduate Senate shall order the hand vote.
4. In a roll call vote the Presiding Officer calls each voting member's name. Each voting member of the Undergraduate Senate, as their name is called, responds in the affirmative, negative, abstains, or passes. At the conclusion of the roll call the Presiding Officer calls the names of those who passed. Each of these voting members of an Association legislative body, as their name is called, responds in the affirmative, negative, or abstains. Any voting member of the Undergraduate Senate can request a roll call vote, and the support of 2 additional voting members of the Undergraduate Senate shall order the roll call vote.
5. After the previous question has been ordered and before the question is put to a voice vote, any voting member of an Association legislative body, without seeking recognition, can request a hand vote or a roll call vote.
6. After a voice vote has been taken and before the result has been announced, the Presiding Officer can order a hand vote.
7. After a vote has been announced and before the Presiding Officer has stated the question on another motion, any voting member of an Association legislative body, without seeking recognition, may request a roll call vote if the previous vote had been a hand or voice vote, or may request a hand vote if the previous vote had been a voice vote.
8. If a request has been made for a hand vote or a roll call vote, the Presiding Officer shall immediately determine whether the Undergraduate Senate want to order such a vote. A request for a roll call vote takes precedence over a request for a hand vote.
9. Unless otherwise provided in the Constitution, the Association By-Laws, the US By-Laws, or these Rules, no motion which according to parliamentary authority requires for passage a majority vote if previous notice was given, but 2/3 otherwise, shall be passed except by a vote of at least 2/3.
Rule of Order 12: Conflicts of Interest 
1. Members of the Undergraduate Senate must declare in a public forum, including the Senate website, all student organizations for which that member is a member. The release of this information must include the group name (and relevant nicknames). This information must be updated at the beginning and end of each quarter, and should be continuously updated, as necessary. 
2. Any member of the Undergraduate Senate with a conflict of interest may, at the discretion of the Executive Committee, demand division of a bill in order to ensure their ability to vote on the portion of the bill for which no conflict of interest exists (cf. Rule of Order ).
3. On any vote of appointment or certification to an office for which a member of an Association legislative body was a candidate, a strong conflict of interest shall be assumed to exist and said member must abstain.
4. On any vote apportioning funds to a student organization for which a member of the Undergraduate Senate is an officer, a strong conflict of interest shall be assumed to exist and said member must abstain.
5. If on any vote that a member of the Undergraduate Senate believes that they has a conflict of interest that could be seen as affecting the member's ability to vote on the issue in question, that member must notify the Presiding Officer that a conflict of interest exists. In such instances, the member in question is strongly encouraged not to vote.
Rule of Order 13: Appeal from the Decision of the Presiding Officer 
Debate on an appeal is limited to 2 minutes of debate by the maker of the appeal, followed by 2 minutes of debate by the Presiding Officer. This debate time may be extended by a majority vote of the Senate. At this point, either the Presiding Officer shall sustain the appeal or a vote shall be made on the appeal with the Presiding Officer stating “All those in favor of sustaining the appeal.” To be sustained, the appeal must be sustained by a majority of voting members.
Rule of Order 14: Amendments 
No motion may be amended except by the vote required for its eventual approval by the Undergraduate Senate.
Rule of Order 15: Motion to Reconsider 
A motion to reconsider an action taken at a meeting of the Undergraduate Senate shall be in order only at the same meeting as, or the meeting immediately subsequent to, the meeting at which the original action was taken. A motion to reconsider an act of the Senate may be made by any voting member of the Undergraduate Senate who voted on the prevailing side, who abstained from voting, or who was not present to vote on the original question due to an excused absence.
Rule of Order 16: Previous Notice 
1. Amendments to the Constitution, the Association By-Laws, the US By-Laws, bills, resolutions, and orders coming before the Association legislative bodies for previous notice shall be treated as normal action items subject to debate, amendment, and other subsidiary, incidental, and privileged motions, excepting that the previous question may not be called nor may a vote be taken on final passage. Debate need only occur at the discretion of the Presiding Officer.
2. Previous noticing items of business at a separate meeting of each Association legislative body shall satisfy the requirements of previous notice for voting on them at a joint meeting of the Association legislative bodies.
3. Previous noticing items of business at a joint meeting of the Association legislative bodies shall satisfy the requirements of previous notice for voting on them at separate meetings of each Association legislative body.
Rule of Order 17: Suspension of the Rules of Order of the Undergraduate Senate 
The Undergraduate Senate may suspend any of these Rules, or section of these Rules, for any specific purpose during the meeting in progress, by a 2/3 vote.
Rule of Order 18: Motion to Recess 
A member of the Undergraduate Senate may make a motion to recess while that member has the floor. The motion shall pass if another member of the Undergraduate Senate seconds the motion. The motion may not be reconsidered. The motion can be overturned with a two-thirds vote of the Undergraduate Senate. If the motion is not overturned, the Undergraduate Senate will immediately recess for five minutes.
The same member of the Undergraduate Senate may not raise the motion to recess more than once per meeting. The motion may only be amended insofar as to lengthen or shorten the recess time.
Rule of Order 19: Effective Communication during Meetings
1. All communication at meetings of the Undergraduate Senate must be public. Members of the Undergraduate Senate may not send emails, place telephone calls, text, or use instant messaging or social networking tools (e.g. GChat, AIM, Facebook, LinkedIn, MySpace, or any MMPORPG).
2. The use of a laptop or other computing device to teleconference a Senator or other speaker who cannot be present due to reasons which do not violate the Constitution, By-Laws or other relevant governing documents, is also allowed.
________________
Rule of Order 20: Rules of Order Not Explicitly Mentioned 
Any Rules not explicitly mentioned shall be dealt with at the discretion of the Presiding Officer. However, any decision made in this regard by the Presiding Officer may be overruled by a 2/3 vote of the Association legislative bodies.
Statement of Authenticity I hereby certify that this document reflects the authentic Rules of Order for the current session of the Undergraduate Senate, and respectfully submit the text herein for legislative approval.